DOCS-762: Add custom API creation info (#1535)
viamrobotics/docs: docs/extend/modular-resources/create-subtype.md

---
title: "Define a New Resource Subtype"
linkTitle: "New API Subtype"
weight: 30
type: "docs"
tags: ["rdk", "extending viam", "modular resources", "API"]
description: "Define an API for a new type of resource."
no_list: true
---

You need to define a new resource *subtype* (and an API for that subtype) if:

> - You have a {{% glossary_tooltip term_id="resource" text="resource" %}} that does not fit into any of the existing [component](/components/) or [service](/services/) subtypes.

Reviewer: I think you may be able to clarify what "fit into" means technically

Author: ```suggestion
- You have a {{% glossary_tooltip term_id="resource" text="resource" %}} that does not fall under any of the existing [component](/components/) or [service](/services/) subtypes.
```
I realize this isn't any more technical, but is it better? The thing is, we could say "You have a resource that requires an API that is different from any of the existing resource APIs." but that would encompass both this and the following bullet into one. The point I am trying to make with these two bullets is that whether or not your thing is an arm/camera/vision service/whatever other existing resource subtype, you might want a different API, and I think that's more clear as these two bullets rather than one, but maybe my intuition is wrong there.

- You have a resource that could fit into an existing subtype, but you want to define an API with different endpoints than the ones in the standard Viam [API](/program/apis/) for that subtype.
For example, you have a [sensor](/components/sensor/) and you want to define a `Calibrate` endpoint.

{{% alert title="Tip" color="tip" %}}

> If you want to use most of an existing API but need just a few other functions, try using the [`DoCommand`](/program/apis/#docommand) endpoint and [extra parameters](/program/use-extra-params/) to add custom functionality to an existing subtype.

Author: It's just one option. People could technically do everything just with DoCommand and we don't even technically need different APIs at all, but that would be a pain. I think it's really up to the user which way they want to go. I think this tip is good as-is in that if you only want to add a little bit more to the API, this may be the way to go (but don't have to!)

{{% /alert %}}

## How to define your new resource API

Viam uses [protocol buffers](https://protobuf.dev/) for API definition.

To define a new subtype, you need to define the messages and methods of the new API in [protobuf](https://github.com/protocolbuffers/protobuf), generate all necessary [protobuf module files](https://buf.build/docs/generate/usage/), and then write code in Python or Go to implement the higher level server and client functions required.
The following steps guide you through this process in more detail.

1. Decide whether your subtype is a {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="component" text="component" >}} or a {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="service" text="service" >}}.

>   If it provides an interface to control hardware, it is a component.

Reviewer: nice

Author: TY to Matt for extra-nice wording :)

  If it provides higher-level functionality, it is a service.
1. Choose a name for your subtype.

>   For example, "gizmo."

Reviewer: Ugh I see why you used gizmo. Let's ask Naveed if we could rename that to something else

>   For example, "gizmo."

Reviewer: the speech one is much better

>   For example, "gizmo."

Author: When actually making a module to try this myself, I found a variety of different examples (including speech, gizmo, and built-in RDK base) to be helpful in combination.

>   For example, "gizmo."

Author: But yeah I could change it to "quadcopter" or something?

1. Create a directory or repository for your module.
  Within that, create a directory called <file>src</file>.
1. Define your new API:

    - [Write the proto](https://protobuf.dev/programming-guides/proto3/) methods in a `<subtype name>.proto` file inside your <file>src/proto</file> directory.
      - [Example modular component proto file](https://github.com/viamrobotics/viam-python-sdk/blob/main/examples/module/src/proto/gizmo.proto)
      - [Example modular service proto file](https://github.com/viam-labs/speech/blob/main/src/proto/speech.proto)
      - [Built-in Viam resource proto files for reference](https://github.com/viamrobotics/api/tree/main/proto/viam)

>     - And define those methods in a protobuf-supported language such as Python or Go in a file called `api.py` (or `api.go`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - And define the proto methods in a protobuf-supported language such as Python or Go in a file called `api.py` or `api.go`.
```
